ed on a large scale in various instruments and
devices. The reactions carried out electrochemically
can be energy efficient and less polluting. Therefore,
study of electrochemistry is important for creating new
technologies that are ecofriendly. The transmission of
sensory signals through cells to brain and vice versa
and communication between the cells are known to
have electrochemical origin. Electrochemistry, is
therefore, a very vast and interdisciplinary subject. In
this Unit, we will cover only some of its important
elementary aspects.
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
· describe an electrochemical cell
and differentiate between galvanic
and electrolytic cells;
· apply Nernst equation for
calculating the emf of galvanic cell
and define standard potential of
the cell;
· derive relation between standard
potential of the cell, Gibbs energy
of cell reaction and its equilibrium
constant;
· define resistivity ( r), conductivity
(k) and molar conductivity (
✆m) of
ionic solutions;
· differentiate between ionic
(electrolytic) and electronic
conductivity;
· describe the method for
measurement of conductivity of
electrolytic solutions and
calculation of their molar
conductivity;
· justify the variation of
conductivity and molar
conductivity of solutions with
change in their concentration and
define 
m (molar conductivity at
zero concentration or infinite
dilution);
· enunciate Kohlrausch law and
learn its applications;
· understand quantitative aspects
of electrolysis;
· describe the construction of some
primary and secondary batteries
and fuel cells;
· explain corrosion as an
electrochemical process.
Objectives
Chemical reactions can be used to produce electrical energy,
conversely, electrical energy can be used to carry out chemical
reactions that do not proceed spontaneously.
2
Electrochemistry
Unit UnitUnit UnitUnit
2
Electrochemistry
Reprint 2026-27

32Chemistry
Cu
Eext >1.1
e
–
CurrentCathode
+ve
Anode
–ve
Zn
Fig. 2.2
Functioning of Daniell
cell when external
voltage Eext opposing the
cell potential is applied.
We had studied the construction and functioning of Daniell cell
(Fig. 2.1). This cell converts the chemical energy liberated during the
redox reaction
Zn(s) + Cu 2+(aq) ® Zn2+(aq) + Cu(s) (2.1)
to electrical energy and has an electrical
potential equal to 1.1 V when concentration
of Zn2+ and Cu2+ ions is unity (1 mol dm–3)*.
Such a device is called a galvanic or a
voltaic cell.
If an external opposite potential is applied
in the galvanic cell [Fig. 2.2(a)] and increased
slowly, we find that the reaction continues to
take place till the opposing voltage reaches
the value 1.1 V [Fig. 2.2(b)] when, the reaction
stops altogether and no current flows through
the cell. Any further increase in the external
potential again starts the reaction but in the
opposite direction [Fig. 2.2(c)]. It now functions
as an electrolytic cell,
 a device for using
electrical energy to carry non-spontaneous
chemical reactions. Both types of cells are
quite important and we shall study some of
their salient features in the following pages.
*Strictly speaking activity should be used instead of concentration. It is directly proportional to concentration. In dilute
solutions, it is equal to concentration. You will study more about it in higher classes.
2.1 2.12.1 2.12.1 ElectrochemicalElectrochemicalElectrochemicalElectrochemicalElectrochemical
Cells CellsCells CellsCells
Fig. 2.1: Daniell cell having electrodes of zinc and
copper dipping in the solutions of their
respective salts.
salt
bridge
Zn Cu
anode cathodecurrent
ZnSO4 CuSO4
E <ext 1.1V
e
-ve +ve
I=0
Zn Cu
ZnSO4 CuSO4
E =ext 1.1V
When E ext < 1.1 V
(i) Electrons flow from Zn rod to
Cu rod hence current flows
from Cu to Zn.
(ii) Zn dissolves at anode and
copper deposits at cathode.
When E ext = 1.1 V
(i) No flow of
electrons or
current.
(ii) No chemical
reaction.
When E ext > 1.1 V
(i) Electrons flow
from Cu to Zn
and current flows
from Zn to Cu.
(ii) Zinc is deposited
at the zinc
electrode and
copper dissolves at
copper electrode.
(a) (b)
(c)
Reprint 2026-27

33 Electrochemistry
As mentioned earlier a galvanic cell is an electrochemical cell that
converts the chemical energy of a spontaneous redox reaction into
electrical energy. In this device the Gibbs energy of the spontaneous
redox reaction is converted into electrical work which may be used for
running a motor or other electrical gadgets  like heater , fan,
geyser, etc.
Daniell cell discussed earlier is one such cell in which the following
redox reaction occurs.
Zn(s) + Cu 2+(aq) ® Zn2+ (aq) + Cu(s)
This reaction is a combination of two half reactions whose addition
gives the overall cell reaction:
(i) Cu2+   +  2e –    ® Cu(s) (reduction half reaction) (2.2)
(ii) Zn(s)  ® Zn2+ + 2e – (oxidation half reaction) (2.3)
These reactions occur in two different portions of the Daniell cell.
The reduction half reaction occurs on the copper electrode while the
oxidation half reaction occurs on the zinc electrode. These two portions
of the cell are also called 
half-cells or redox couples . The copper
electrode may be called the reduction half cell and the zinc electrode,
the oxidation half-cell.
We can construct innumerable number of galvanic cells on the pattern
of Daniell cell by taking combinations of different half-cells. Each half-
cell consists of a metallic electrode dipped into an electrolyte. The two
half-cells are connected by a metallic wire through a voltmeter and a
switch externally. The electrolytes of the two half-cells are connected
internally through a salt bridge as shown in Fig. 2.1.  Sometimes, both
the electrodes dip in the same electrolyte solution and in such cases we
do not require a salt bridge.
At each electrode-electrolyte interface there is a tendency of metal
ions from the solution to deposit on the metal electrode trying to make
it positively charged. At the same time, metal atoms of the electrode
have a tendency to go into the solution as ions and leave behind the
electrons at the electrode trying to make it negatively charged. At
equilibrium, there is a separation of charges and depending on the
tendencies of the two opposing reactions, the electrode may be positively
or negatively charged with  respect to the solution. A potential difference
develops between the electrode and the electrolyte which is called
electrode potential. When the concentrations of all the species involved
in a half-cell is unity then the electrode potential is known as standard
electrode potential . According to IUPAC convention, standard
reduction potentials are now called standard electrode potentials. In a
galvanic cell, the half-cell in which oxidation takes place is called anode
and it has a negative potential with respect to the solution. The other
half-cell in which reduction takes place is called cathode and it has a
positive potential with respect to the solution. Thus, there exists a
potential difference between the two electrodes and as soon as the
switch is in the on position the electrons flow from negative electrode
to positive electrode. The direction of current flow is opposite to that of
electron flow.
2.2 Galvanic Cells2.2 Galvanic Cells2.2 Galvanic Cells2.2 Galvanic Cells2.2 Galvanic Cells
Reprint 2026-27

34Chemistry
The potential difference between the two electrodes of a galvanic
cell is called the cell potential  and is measured in volts. The cell
potential is the difference between the electrode potentials (reduction
potentials) of 